>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY NOVEMBER 15:
VLADIMIR PUTIN IS ACCUSED OF
AGGRESSION AT A CONTENTIOUS
MEETING OF WORLD LEADERS IN
AUSTRALIA.
WE’LL EXAMINE WHETHER THERE IS A
NEW COLD WAR.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, FROM
IOWA: SUPERWEEDS, HERBICIDE-
RESISTANT PLANTS THAT COULD
THREATEN AMERICAN AGRICULTURE.
>> THIS PLANT, WHEN IT’S MATURE,
WILL BE... CAN GET, YOU KNOW,
FIVE TO SIX FEET TALL.
WHERE IT’S VERY HEAVY, YOU CAN
HAVE YIELDS CUT IN HALF, 50%
LOSSES.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FROM
MILWAUKEE, HONORING A HOLOCAUST
VICTIM BY MAKING THE DRESSES SHE
NEVER GOT TO CREATE.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AT A SUMMIT MEETING IN AUSTRALIA
OF THE LEADERS OF THE WORLD’S 20
LARGEST ECONOMIES, PRESIDENT
OBAMA TODAY DESCRIBED WHAT HE
SAID IS AMERICA’S ONE-OF-A-KIND
ROLE IN THE WORLD AND CONDEMNED
RUSSIA’S INCURSIONS INTO
UKRAINE.
>> AS THE WORLD’S ONLY
SUPERPOWER, THE UNITED STATES
HAS UNIQUE RESPONSIBILITIES THAT
WE GLADLY EMBRACE.
WE’RE LEADING THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY IN THE FIGHT TO
DESTROY THE TERRORIST GROUP
ISIL.
WE’RE LEADING IN DEALING WITH
EBOLA IN WEST AFRICA AND IN
OPPOSING RUSSIA’S AGGRESSION
AGAINST UKRAINE.
>> Sreenivasan: BRITISH PRIME
MINISTER DAVID CAMERON AND
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
ARE BOTH AT THE SUMMIT, AND
LATER, AFTER A PRIVATE MEETING,
CAMERON SAID HE HAD WARNED PUTIN
OF ADDITIONAL SANCTIONS.
RUSSIA SENT NEW TROOPS INTO
UKRAINE EARLIER THIS WEEK.
IN AN INTERVIEW WITH GERMAN
TELEVISION, PUTIN WARNED THAT
SANCTIONS COULD BACKFIRE BY
LIMITING RUSSIA’S ABILITY TO DO
BUSINESS WITH THE WEST.
AND HE ADDED THIS:
>> (translated): OF COURSE WE
EXPECT THE SITUATION TO CHANGE
FOR THE BETTER.
OF COURSE WE EXPECT THE
UKRAINIAN CRISIS TO END.
AND OF COURSE WE WANT TO HAVE
NORMAL RELATIONS WITH OUR
PARTNERS, INCLUDING IN THE
UNITED STATES AND EUROPE.
>> Sreenivasan: DURING A
SURPRISE VISIT TO BAGHDAD TODAY,
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT
CHIEFS, GENERAL MARTIN DEMPSEY,
SAID THE U.S. MILITARY HAD
HELPED IRAQI AND KURDISH FORCES
"PULL IRAQ BACK FROM THE
PRECIPICE."
AND HE SAID THE TIDE IS STARTING
TO TURN AGAINST ISIS FIGHTERS
THERE.
YESTERDAY, IRAQI GOVERNMENT
TROOPS REPORTEDLY DROVE THE
EXTREMISTS OUT OF THE TOWN NORTH
OF BAGHDAD WHERE THE NATION’S
LARGEST OIL REFINERY IS LOCATED.
POPE FRANCIS HAS WEIGHED IN
AGAINST THE SO CALLED RIGHT TO
DIE MOVEMENT.
SPEAKING TODAY TO THE
ASSOCIATION OF ITALIAN CATHOLIC
DOCTORS, THE POPE SAID THE
MOVEMENT OFFERS WHAT HE CALLED A
"FALSE SENSE OF COMPASSION."
TWO WEEKS AGO, A TOP VATICAN
OFFICIAL CONDEMNED THE ASSISTED
SUICIDE OF BRITTANY MAYNARD, THE
29-YEAR-OLD SUFFERING WITH BRAIN
CANCER.
SHE TOOK A FATAL DOSE OF
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS IN AN EFFORT,
SHE SAID, TO DIE WITH DIGNITY.
ACCORDING TO NEW DATA, LAST
MONTH TIED FOR THE WARMEST
OCTOBER IN THE 134 YEARS THAT
RECORDS HAVE BEEN KEPT.
IT WAS THE THIRD CONSECUTIVE
MONTH OF RECORD-SETTING
TEMPERATURES.
UNLESS TEMPERATURES AROUND THE
WORLD ARE SHARPLY BELOW AVERAGE
THIS MONTH AND NEXT, EXPERTS SAY
THIS YEAR WILL GO DOWN AS THE
WARMEST ON RECORD.
THE SPACECRAFT THAT MADE A
HISTORIC LANDING ON A COMET
EARLIER THIS WEEK HAS LOST POWER
AND, TODAY, IT STOPPED SENDING
BACK INFORMATION BACK TO EARTH.
SCIENTISTS HOPE ITS SOLAR-
POWERED BATTERIES WILL RECHARGE,
BUT THE SPACECRAFT TOUCHED DOWN
IN AN AREA THAT APPARENTLY
RECEIVES LITTLE SUNLIGHT.
BEFORE IT SHUT DOWN, SCIENTISTS
CONDUCTED A SERIES OF
EXPERIMENTS, AND THE SPACESHIP
RELAYED THE INFORMATION BACK TO
EARTH FOR ANALYSIS.
COMETS ARE BELIEVED TO CONTAIN
THE REMNANTS OF MATERIALS FROM
WHEN THE SOLAR SYSTEM WAS FORMED
BILLIONS OF YEARS AGO.
DURING A MEETING WITH CENTRAL
AMERICAN LEADERS, VICE PRESIDENT
JOE BIDEN ANNOUNCED A PLAN
STARTING NEXT MONTH THAT WILL
ALLOW CHILDREN IN GUATEMALA,
HONDURAS AND EL SALVADOR TO
APPLY FOR REFUGEE STATUS IF
THEIR PARENTS ARE LIVING LEGALLY
IN THE UNITED STATES.
BIDEN ANNOUNCED THE PLAN
YESTERDAY IN RESPONSE TO LAST
SUMMER’S MASS MIGRATION TO THE
U.S. BY TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
CENTRAL AMERICAN CHILDREN.
>> WE ALL HAVE AN OBLIGATION TO
HELP THE MOST VULNERABLE AND TO
KEEP FAMILIES TOGETHER.
>> Sreenivasan: AND TODAY IS THE
FIRST DAY TO GO TO
www.healthcare.gov TO ENROLL FOR
NEXT YEAR’S HEALTH INSURANCE
UNDER THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT,
ALSO KNOWN AS OBAMACARE.
THE WEB SITE RELAUNCHED THIS
MORNING WITHOUT INCIDENT.
THE ENROLLMENT PERIOD RUNS UNTIL
FEBRUARY 15.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST WEEKEND, ON
THE 25th ANNIVERSARY OF THE FALL
OF THE BERLIN WALL, FORMER
SOVIET LEADER MIKHAIL GORBACHEV
WARNED THAT A NEW COLD WAR COULD
SOON BE UNDER WAY, IF IT ISN’T
ALREADY.
AND IN JUST THE FEW DAYS SINCE,
RUSSIA REPORTEDLY SENT MORE
TROOPS INTO UKRAINE AND THEN
SENT FOUR WARSHIPS TO THE WATERS
OFF AUSTRALIA, WHERE VLADIMIR
PUTIN AND OTHER WORLD LEADERS
ARE MEETING.
WHAT DOES PUTIN HAVE IN MIND?
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED NOW BY
KIMBERLY MARTEN.
SHE IS A RUSSIAN SCHOLAR AND A
PROFESSOR AT BARNARD COLLEGE AND
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY.
SO, YOU KNOW WHAT’S INTERESTING
IS, THOSE TWO WERE JUST THE MOST
RECENT IN A LONG LIST OF
AGGRESSIVE MOVES THAT RUSSIA HAS
BEEN TAKING.
JUST A FEW WEEKS AGO, SWEDEN WAS
LOOKING FOR A SUBMARINE OFF
THEIR COAST.
NOW, THEY CONFIRMED THERE WAS A
FOREIGN SUB.
BUT THE SUSPICION IS CERTAINLY
ON THE RUSSIANS.
WE’VE HAD AGGRESSIVE FLIGHTS
NEAR THE U.S. SIMULATING BOMBING
RUNS THAT COULD WORK FOR NEW
YORK, CHICAGO.
WHAT’S HE DOING?
>> I THINK PART OF WHAT’S GOING
ON IS THAT PUTIN IS TRYING TO
TAKE ATTENTION OFF OF THE
PROBLEMS THAT THE RUSSIAN
ECONOMY IS FACING.
THE SANCTIONS ARE WORKING MUCH
BETTER THAN MANY PEOPLE
PREDICTED THAT THEY WOULD, AND
THEY’RE HAVING REAL IMPACT ON
THE RUSSIAN OIL INDUSTRY, WHICH
IS ONE OF THE MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS
TO THE RUSSIAN BUDGET.
AND THE UNITED STATES AND THE
EUROPEANS ARE HOLDING TOGETHER
ON THOSE SANCTIONS MUCH BETTER
THAN PEOPLE THOUGHT THEY WERE
GOING TO.
AND NOW, EVEN PROPOSING MORE
SANCTIONS.
AND SO I THINK THAT WHAT PUTIN
NEEDS TO DO IS CREATE AN ENEMY
IN ORDER TO JUSTIFY WHAT’S
HAPPENING TO THE ECONOMY, TO GET
PEOPLE TO BE MOTIVATED BY A
PATRIOTIC FERVOR IN SUPPORTING
HIM, AND SO WHAT THAT MEANS IS
THAT HE’S TRYING TO PROVOKE THE
WEST, TRYING TO PROVOKE THE
UNITED STATES INTO TAKING
SOME KIND OF ACTION THAT
JUSTIFIES WHAT HE’S DOING.
>> Sreenivasan: IS IT WORKING?
>> NOT SO FAR, THANK GOODNESS.
I MEAN, WHEN WE HEAR ABOUT THESE
NEW BOMBER PATROLS THAT ARE
HAPPENING, PUTIN IS NOW
THREATENING THAT THEY’RE
GOING TO GO INTO THE GULF OF
MEXICO.
I THOUGHT IT WAS REALLY
INTERESTING THAT WE’VE HAD
RETIRED AIR FORCE OFFICERS WHO
HAVE WORKED ON THIS IN THE COLD
WAR PERIOD SAYING, "OH, IT’S
NOTHING.
WE SHOULDN’T BE WORRYING ABOUT
THIS."
AND I THINK THAT’S THE RIGHT
RESPONSE.
I THINK THE MOST IMPORTANT THING
IS THAT THE UNITED STATES DOES
STAY CALM AND SAY, "LOOK, RUSSIA
IS NOT REALLY A MILITARY THREAT
AT THIS POINT.
LET’S KEEP THINGS IN
PERSPECTIVE."
>> Sreenivasan: AND IT SEEMS
LIKE HE’S ALSO TRYING TO SHORE
UP HIS BASE.
THERE WERE THESE PHOTOS THAT THE
RUSSIAN NEWS AGENCY JUST
RELEASED OF ALLEGEDLY A
UKRAINIAN FIGHTER JET
BLOWING OUT... OR SHOOTING DOWN
THE MALAYSIAN AIRLINES, AND IN
THE PUBLIC OPINION POLLS IN
RUSSIA, THERE’S ONLY A VERY
SMALL FRACTION OF PEOPLE THAT
ACTUALLY BELIEVE THAT THE REBELS
COULD HAVE DONE IT.
>> YES.
AND THE PHOTOGRAPHS WERE VERY
BADLY PHOTOSHOPPED.
SO PEOPLE HAVE GONE BACK AND
FOUND EARLIER IMAGES THAT MATCH
THE IMAGES THAT WERE RELEASED OF
SUPPOSEDLY HAVING HAPPENED IN
THIS EVENT.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW, WHEN
YOU SAID RUSSIAN OIL COMPANIES,
THAT ALSO MADE ME THINK THE
PRICE OF OIL SEEMS TO BE GOING
DOWN AND DOWN.
IT’S DOWN TO AROUND 75 BUCKS.
THAT HAS TO HAVE AN IMPACT ON
RUSSIA’S OVERALL ECONOMY AND
WHAT THEY’RE ABLE TO EXPORT
AND SELL TO THE REST OF THE
WORLD.
>> IT REALLY DOES.
THE NEW ESTIMATE THAT CAME OUT
FROM THE UNITED STATES ENERGY
ADMINISTRATION JUST A COUPLE OF
DAYS AGO IS THAT PROBABLY
THROUGHOUT 2015, OIL PRICES
ARE GOING TO HOVER AROUND $80
A BARREL.
AND THE RUSSIANS HAD BEEN
PLANNING THAT IT WOULD BE MORE
LIKE $90 A BARREL, AND THAT’S
WHAT THEIR STATE BUDGET WAS
BASED ON FOR 2015.
SO, THEY’RE GOING TO BE IN SOME
DIFFICULTY MANAGING TO GET THE
BASE THAT THEY NEED IN ORDER TO
HAVE THEIR EXPENSES COVERED,
ESPECIALLY BECAUSE NOW THAT THEY
ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS AREA IN
CRIMEA AND NOW THAT THEY’RE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE EASTERN
PARTS OF UKRAINE, THESE ARE
IMPOVERISHED TERRITORIES-- THE
ONES IN EASTERN UKRAINE HAVE
FACED A LOT OF DESTRUCTION,
THE PEOPLE ARE UNEMPLOYED, AND
SOMEHOW RUSSIA IS GOING TO HAVE
TO PROVIDE FOR THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: JUST LIKE WHEN
WE SEE LOWER GAS PRICES AS
SOMETHING BACK INTO CONSUMERS’
POCKETBOOKS HERE, DO YOU THINK
THAT THERE WILL BE ENOUGH
FRUSTRATION ON THE PARTS OF
RUSSIANS WHEN THEY SEE THESE
SORT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS,
VERY DIRE-- MAYBE IT’S
UNEMPLOYMENT, MAYBE IT’S
SOMETHING THAT AFFECTS THEM--
THAT SAYS "YOU KNOW WHAT, STOP
WITH ALL THE SABER RATTLING,
FOCUS ON OUR COUNTRY"?
>> IT MIGHT HAPPEN, BUT KEEP IN
MIND THAT THERE’S A LONG HISTORY
IN RUSSIA OF THE GENERAL
POPULATION BEING
RELATIVELY PASSIVE, OF JUST
SORT OF ACCEPTING WHAT THE
GOVERNMENT DOES, OF BELIEVING
THAT THE GOVERNMENT MUST HAVE
SUPERIOR KNOWLEDGE TO WHAT THEY
HAVE.
IT WILL BE VERY INTERESTING TO
SEE WHAT HAPPENS AS THE WINTER
GOES BY.
I THINK THIS MIGHT BE A YEAR
OF CONCERN FOR RUSSIA, BUT I
THINK IT’S TOO EARLY TO
PREDICT THAT SOMETHING’S
GOING TO GO WRONG YET.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
KIMBERLY MARTEN, THANKS SO MUCH
FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW
TO OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, OUR
ORIGINAL IN-DEPTH REPORTS FROM
AROUND THE NATION AND AROUND THE
WORLD.
TONIGHT, WE TAKE A LOOK AT A
GROWING PROBLEM IN MANY OF OUR
STATES THAT PRODUCE THE FOOD WE
EAT.
WE’RE TALKING ABOUT WEEDS THAT
ARE RESISTANT TO COMMON
HERBICIDES, AND THAT EXPERTS SAY
THREATEN THE ABILITY OF FARMERS
TO GROW CROPS.
RECENTLY, THE E.P.A. APPROVED
NEW CHEMICALS THAT COULD HELP
THOSE FARMERS, BUT SOME
ENVIRONMENTALISTS SAY THOSE
CHEMICALS WILL POSE RISKS.
THE NEWSHOUR’S MEGAN THOMPSON
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: AUTUMN MEANS IT’S
HARVEST TIME IN IOWA, THE HEART
OF AMERICA’S HEARTLAND.
FARMER JEFF JORGENSEN IS BUSY
HARVESTING SOYBEANS.
HE ALSO GROWS CORN ON ABOUT
2,000 ACRES IN THE SOUTHWEST
CORNER OF THE STATE.
FARMING IS BIG BUSINESS HERE IN
IOWA.
THIS STATE IS THE LARGEST
PRODUCER OF CORN IN THE COUNTRY,
AND IT’S SECOND ONLY TO ILLINOIS
IN THE PRODUCTION OF SOYBEANS.
FOR JORGENSEN, WHOSE FAMILY’S
BEEN FARMING FOR FOUR
GENERATIONS, IT’S ALL ABOUT
KEEPING HIS YIELDS AS HIGH AS HE
CAN.
>> YIELD MONITOR’S HERE.
>> Reporter: AND ONE OF THE
BIGGEST BATTLES HE FIGHTS IS
AGAINST WEEDS.
>> A WEED IN THE FIELD’S GOING
TO TAKE MOISTURE, GOING TO TAKE
SUNLIGHT, NUTRIENTS AWAY FROM
THE PLANTS SURROUNDING IT.
AND THAT’S WHY WE HAVE TO KEEP
CLEAN FIELDS.
>> Reporter: BUT JORGENSEN SAYS
KEEPING "CLEAN" FIELDS HAS BEEN
GETTING HARDER AND HARDER.
LIKE MANY FARMERS, HE RELIED FOR
YEARS MAINLY ON AN HERBICIDE
CALLED ROUNDUP THAT’S
MANUFACTURED BY MONSANTO.
ROUNDUP USE EXPLODED IN THE MID
’90s WITH THE INTRODUCTION OF
NEW, GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS
THAT DOMINATE THE MARKET TODAY.
THE CROPS WERE ENGINEERED TO
WITHSTAND ROUNDUP, SO FARMERS
COULD JUST SPRAY AN ENTIRE FIELD
AND THE HERBICIDE WOULD KILL THE
WEEDS BUT NOT THE CROPS.
>> ANY WEED YOU HAD IN THE
FIELD, ROUNDUP TOOK CARE OF.
ROUNDUP REVOLUTIONIZED WEED
MANAGEMENT FOR FARMERS.
>> Reporter: JORGENSEN SAYS IT
ALL WORKED GREAT FOR A WHILE.
HE NO LONGER HAD TO SPEND LOTS
OF TIME PLOWING TO KILL WEEDS.
BUT OVER TIME, ROUNDUP AND ITS
GENERIC VERSIONS-- ALL OF WHICH
CONTAIN A CHEMICAL CALLED
GLYPHOSATE-- STOPPED WORKING SO
WELL.
>> SIMPLE USE OF ONE HERBICIDE
RECURRENTLY IN THE SYSTEM IS
GOING TO INEVITABLY RESULT IN
WEEDS THAT EVOLVE RESISTANCE TO
THAT HERBICIDE.
>> Reporter: AGRONOMY PROFESSOR
MIKE OWEN IS A NATIONALLY-
RECOGNIZED WEED EXPERT AT IOWA
STATE UNIVERSITY IN AMES.
>> IT IS A WIDESPREAD AND... AND
A SIGNIFICANT FROM AN ECONOMIC
PERSPECTIVE PROBLEM ACROSS THE
MIDWEST AND, DARE I SAY, ACROSS
AGRICULTURE IN GENERAL.
>> Reporter: OWEN SAYS IT’S NO
MYSTERY WHY THIS HAPPENED;
IT CAN ALL BE EXPLAINED BY
EVOLUTION.
IN IOWA, ONE OF THE WEEDS THAT’S
EVOLVED TO BE RESISTANT IS
CALLED "WATERHEMP."
>> THIS IS GIANT WATERHEMP, A
WEED THAT WE HAVE DOWN IN
SOUTHWEST IOWA THAT’S BECOME
MORE TOLERANT.
THIS PLANT, WHEN IT’S MATURE,
WILL BE... CAN GET, YOU KNOW,
FIVE TO SIX FEET TALL.
WHERE IT’S VERY HEAVY, YOU CAN
HAVE YIELDS CUT IN HALF, 50%
LOSSES.
>> IN IOWA, WE WOULD ESTIMATE AS
THAT ABOUT 75% OF THE FIELDS
HAVE INFESTATIONS OF COMMON
WATERHEMP THAT ARE RESISTANT TO
ONE OR MORE HERBICIDES.
>> Reporter: THE WEEDS ARE NOT
JUST A PROBLEM IN IOWA.
IN ONE SURVEY, ALMOST 50% OF
FARMERS ACROSS THE U.S. REPORTED
HERBICIDE-RESISTANT WEEDS IN
THEIR FIELDS.
THE PROBLEM IS WORST IN THE
SOUTH, WHERE SOME COTTON FIELDS
CAN’T BE FARMED.
BUT THE THREAT IS CREEPING NORTH
INTO THE CORN AND SOYBEAN BELTS.
KEEP IN MIND, CROP YIELDS IN THE
U.S. ARE BOOMING, BUT MIKE OWEN
SAYS IT’S POSSIBLE THEY COULD BE
EVEN HIGHER WERE IT NOT FOR THE
WEEDS.
OWEN SAYS IT’S DIFFICULT TO
QUANTIFY THE DAMAGE, BUT IF THE
WEEDS START HAVING A SIGNIFICANT
IMPACT, IT COULD BE TOO LATE.
>> WE HAVE, IF YOU WILL, HIDDEN
YIELD LOSSES AND THUS HIDDEN
PROFIT LOSSES ON MILLIONS AND
MILLIONS OF ACRES IN THE
MIDWEST.
IT HASN’T GOTTEN TO THE POINT,
IF YOU WILL, OF A TRAIN WRECK.
>> Reporter: WHAT COULD HAPPEN
OR WHAT’S AT STAKE IF THIS
DOESN’T GET UNDER CONTROL?
>> WELL, THE TRAIN WRECK, AND...
AND THAT IS THE INABILITY TO
PRODUCE CROPS.
>> Reporter: OVER THE LAST FOUR
YEARS, THE ISSUE HAS STARTED TO
GET MORE AND MORE ATTENTION.
CONGRESS HELD HEARINGS, AND THE
U.S.D.A. RECENTLY ANNOUNCED NEW
MEASURES IT’S TAKING TO COMBAT
THE PROBLEM, A PROBLEM ALSO
ACKNOWLEDGED BY MONSANTO.
AND NOW, ANOTHER MAJOR
MANUFACTURER HAS STEPPED IN.
>> GROWERS ACROSS THE COUNTRY
FACE AN INCREASING PROBLEM FROM
RESISTANT AND HARD-TO-CONTROL
WEEDS.
>> Reporter: BIOTECH GIANT DOW
AGROSCIENCES RECENTLY WON
FEDERAL APPROVAL FOR NEW
GENETICALLY MODIFIED CORN AND
SOYBEANS, AND A NEW HERBICIDE TO
GO WITH THEM CALLED ENLIST DUO.
DOW IS PROMOTING IT AS AN ANSWER
TO THE HERBICIDE-RESISTANT WEED
PROBLEM.
>> THESE WEEDS ARE OUT OF
CONTROL.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE’S ANOTHER
PIECE TO ALL OF THIS, AND THAT
IS WHETHER THE HERBICIDES USED
TO CONTROL WEEDS POSE HEALTH
RISKS FOR FARMERS AND THE REST
OF US.
THE CENTER FOR FOOD SAFETY, A
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL ADVOCACY
GROUP, RECENTLY SUED THE E.P.A.,
ALLEGING THE AGENCY DIDN’T FULLY
ANALYZE THE NEW HERBICIDE’S
POTENTIAL EFFECTS ON HUMAN
HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT.
THE GROUP CITES STUDIES THAT
SUGGEST A CORRELATION BETWEEN
PESTICIDES AND DISEASES LIKE
NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA AND
PARKINSON’S.
ATTORNEY ANDREW KIMBRELL HEADS
THE CENTER FOR FOOD SAFETY.
>> THEY’RE BAD FOR US, RIGHT,
BECAUSE IT’S GOING TO MEAN MUCH
MORE OF THESE TOXIC HERBICIDES
IN OUR FOOD, IN OUR GROUNDWATER,
IN THE AIR.
>> Reporter: BUT IN APPROVING
THE PRODUCT, THE E.P.A.
PUBLISHED THIS DOCUMENT, SAYING
ITS SCIENTISTS DETERMINED:
"WHEN USED ACCORDING TO LABEL
DIRECTIONS, ENLIST DUO IS SAFE
FOR EVERYONE, INCLUDING INFANTS,
THE DEVELOPING FETUS, THE
ELDERLY AND MORE HIGHLY EXPOSED
GROUPS SUCH AS AGRICULTURAL
WORKERS."
IN A STATEMENT TO THE NEWSHOUR,
DOW QUOTED THE E.P.A. ANALYSIS
AND ADDED ITS NEW SYSTEM HELPS
FARMERS "AS THEY STRUGGLE TO
CONTROL WEEDS THAT IMPACT THE
FOOD SUPPLY WHILE RESPECTING
THE WELLBEING OF BOTH PEOPLE
AND THE ENVIRONMENT."
THE E.P.A. APPROVED THE NEW
PRODUCT FOR USE ONLY IN SIX
STATES SO FAR, AND IT IMPOSED
RESTRICTIONS-- 30-FOOT BUFFER
ZONES, NO AERIAL SPRAYING AND NO
APPLICATIONS IN WINDY
CONDITIONS.
THE NEW PRODUCT IS A MIX OF THE
MAIN INGREDIENT IN ROUNDUP--
GLYPHOSATE-- AND A CHEMICAL
CALLED 2,4-D, USED FOR DECADES
AND FOUND IN MANY COMMON LAWN
CARE PRODUCTS.
PRETTY MUCH ANYBODY CAN WALK
INTO A HARDWARE STORE AND BUY A
PRODUCT FOR USE ON THEIR LAWN
THAT CONTAINS THIS STUFF, SO, IF
IT’S SO DANGEROUS, WHY IS IT SO
WIDELY AVAILABLE?
>> THIS ISN’T JUST ABOUT 2,4-D.
ENLIST DUO, THE PRODUCT THAT’S
BEEN APPROVED, IS ALSO
GLYPHOSATE.
WHAT DO THEY MEAN TOGETHER?
WE KNOW SOME OF THE HEALTH
IMPACTS SEPARATELY, BUT WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN THEY’RE... WHEN
THEY COME TOGETHER AND... AND
COMBINE?
WHAT DOES THAT ACTUALLY MEAN FOR
HEALTH EFFECTS?
WHAT DOES IT MEAN FOR TOXIC
EFFECTS ON FARMERS AND
APPLICATORS?
>> WE HAVE THE MODEL SYSTEM WITH
THE E.P.A. REVIEWING THE SAFETY
OF THESE HERBICIDES, AND MY
SENSE IS THAT THE EVIDENCE SAYS
THAT THE HERBICIDES WHEN USED
APPROPRIATELY ARE SAFE.
>> Reporter: BUT EVEN IF THEY
ARE SAFE, THERE ARE SERIOUS
CONCERNS THAT WEEDS COULD BECOME
RESISTANT TO THE NEW HERBICIDE
JUST AS THEY DID TO ROUNDUP.
IT’S SOMETHING THE E.P.A. IS
REQUIRING DOW TO MONITOR.
>> THE PROBLEM WILL INEVITABLY
GET WORSE UNLESS CHANGES ARE
MADE.
>> Reporter: CHANGES LIKE
RELYING LESS ON CHEMICALS, AND
ALSO GOING BACK TO SOME OF THE
OLD WAYS LIKE GROWING CROPS IN
THE OFF SEASON TO SUPPRESS WEEDS
AND REMOVING SOME WEEDS
MECHANICALLY.
>> GROWERS THUS FAR HAVE BEEN
WANTING A NEW, SIMPLE SOLUTION.
AND UNFORTUNATELY, THE INDUSTRY
HAS NOT BEEN ABLE TO COME UP
WITH, IF YOU WILL, ANOTHER
SILVER BULLET.
>> Reporter: FARMER JEFF
JORGENSEN SAYS HE THINKS THE NEW
DOW PRODUCTS EXPECTED TO COME TO
MARKET THIS SPRING WILL HELP
FARMERS, ESPECIALLY IN THE
SOUTH.
TO BATTLE HIS WEEDS, HE’S BEEN
MIXING OTHER HERBICIDES IN WITH
ROUNDUP, SOMETHING MONSANTO
RECOMMENDS.
BUT JORGENSSON HE SAYS HE KNOWS
HIS SYSTEM WILL INEVITABLY HAVE
TO EVOLVE, JUST LIKE THE WEEDS.
ARE YOU AFRAID THAT YOUR SYSTEM
MIGHT STOP WORKING?
>> OH, THERE’S NO QUESTION IT
WILL CHANGE.
THERE WILL BE A TIME WHERE IT
WILL NOT HAVE THE EFFECT THAT IT
DOES NOW.
AFTER SEEING WHAT’S HAPPENED
WITH ROUNDUP, YOU ALWAYS HAVE
THE WORRY THAT WHATEVER CHEMICAL
PROGRAM YOU’RE USING, WHAT WILL
HAPPEN IF IT LOSES ITS
EFFECTIVENESS.
THAT IS ALWAYS ON FARMERS’ MINDS
BECAUSE WE NEED TO BE ABLE TO
CONTROL THE PROBLEMS THAT WE
HAVE IN FIELDS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT QUESTIONS
DO YOU HAVE ABOUT HERBICIDE-
RESISTANT WEEDS?
ASK PRODUCER MEGAN THOMPSON IN A
Q&A ON FACEBOOK.
VISIT facebook.com/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: IT’S BEEN NEARLY
70 YEARS NOW SINCE THE END OF
WORLD WAR II.
EVEN SO, STORIES CONTINUE TO
COME TO LIGHT ABOUT SOME OF THE
VICTIMS OF THE HOLOCAUST.
RECENTLY, NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MARTIN FLETCHER
LEARNED WHAT’S BEING DONE TO
HONOR THE LIFE AND WORKS OF ONE
WOMAN, ONE OF THE SIX MILLION
VICTIMS.
HIS PIECE IS A COLLABORATION
WITH MILWAUKEE PUBLIC
TELEVISION.
>> Reporter: WHEN THE NAZIS
OCCUPIED CZECHOSLOVAKIA IN 1939,
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF JEWS
APPLIED FOR VISAS TO ANYWHERE,
AND AMONG THEM PAUL STRNAD AND
HIS WIFE HEDWIG, NICKNAMED HEDY.
THEIR BEST HOPE TO SAVE THEIR
LIVES WAS HELP FROM THEIR COUSIN
ALVIN, THOUSANDS OF MILES AWAY
IN MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN.
SO, ON DECEMBER 11, 1939, PAUL
WROTE HIM THIS LETTER.
>> "YOU MAY IMAGINE THAT WE HAVE
A GREAT INTEREST OF LEAVING
EUROPE AS SOON AS POSSIBLE."
>> Reporter: AND PAUL HOPED HE
HAD AN ACE UP HIS SLEEVE-- THESE
DRAWINGS, EIGHT BEAUTIFUL
DRESSES AND ALL ACCESSORIES,
DOWN TO HATPINS AND SHOES,
PURSES AND GLOVES.
MODERN.
ELEGANT.
HIS WIFE HEDY WAS A SEAMSTRESS,
A DRESS DESIGNER.
COULD ALVIN FIND A FIRM IN
MILWAUKEE WHO’D HIRE HEDY AND
SIGN AN AFFIDAVIT TO GRANT THE
COUPLE VISAS TO THE U.S.?
IN HIS LETTER, PAUL WROTE:
>> "I HOPE THE DRESS
MANUFACTURERS YOU MENTIONED IN
YOUR LETTER WILL LIKE THEM."
>> Reporter: KAREN STRNAD IS
ALVIN’S GRANDDAUGHTER.
>> IT WAS A LETTER THAT WAS
PLEADING FOR, YOU KNOW, A
SAVIOR, FOR, YOU KNOW, SURVIVAL,
AND USING THE DRESSES AS A TOOL
TO BE ABLE TO GET OUT OF THERE.
>> Reporter: ALVIN STRNAD TRIED
TO FIND HEDY A JOB AND VISAS FOR
THEM BOTH, BUT TOO LATE.
PAUL WAS DECLARED DEAD JANUARY
31, 1943, MURDERED IN EITHER THE
TREBLINKA CONCENTRATION CAMP OR
THE WARSAW GHETTO.
HEDY’S FATE IS UNCLEAR, BUT HER
DRESSES LIVE ON.
ALMOST 60 YEARS LATER, KAREN’S
PARENTS FOUND THE LETTER IN THE
BASEMENT, COMPLETE WITH A NAZI
CENSOR’S SWASTIKA STAMP AND THE
COLORFUL DRAWINGS.
>> THE DRESSES REPRESENT
PREJUDICE AND PERSECUTION AND
WHAT WAS LOST IN THE HOLOCAUST
BECAUSE OF IT.
THE DRESSES REPRESENT LOVE.
>> Reporter: THE STRNADS GAVE
THE LETTER AND DRESS DESIGNS TO
WHAT IS TODAY THE JEWISH MUSEUM
OF MILWAUKEE, JUST ANOTHER
PAINFUL LINK TO THE PAST.
UNTIL ONE DAY A VISITOR HAD AN
IDEA-- WHY NOT MAKE THE DRESSES?
>> WE HAD A WONDERFUL
OPPORTUNITY TO FULFILL A
VICTIM’S DREAM.
>> Reporter: SO, WHEN KATHY
BERNSTEIN, THE MUSEUM’S
DIRECTOR, MET THE COSTUME
DIRECTOR OF THE MILWAUKEE
REPERTORY THEATER, SHE DIDN’T
HESITATE.
>> AND I SAID, "WE WANT TO
CREATE AN EXHIBIT.
WE WANT TO SHOW... HAVE A
TANGIBLE EXAMPLE OF WHAT HAS
BEEN LOST IN THE HOLOCAUST, AND
IS THIS SOMETHING THE REP CAN
DO?"
WELL, SHE SAID, "ABSOLUTELY."
>> Reporter: AND THE REST, AS
THEY SAY, IS HISTORY.
THE MILWAUKEE REP BEGAN A LABOR
OF LOVE.
>> THEY BECAME FILLED WITH
HEDWIG’S STORY, AND IT BECAME
PERSONAL FOR THEM.
>> Reporter: THEN, HARD WORK
PAID OFF; A RESEARCHER FOUND A
LETTER FROM HEDY, AND BIT BY BIT
HEDY STRNAD TOOK SHAPE.
>> WE FOUND OUT SHE HAD RED
HAIR, AND THAT SHE SMOKED
CIGARETTES, AND THAT SHE HAD A
SENSE OF HUMOR.
>> Reporter: TODAY, THE DRESSES
WITH THEIR ACCESSORIES, HEDY’S
LAST HOPE FOR SURVIVAL, ARE THE
STARS OF AN EXHIBIT IN THE
MILWAUKEE JEWISH MUSEUM CALLED
"STITCHING HISTORY FROM THE
HOLOCAUST," RUNNING THROUGH
FEBRUARY 2015.
>> IT’S HAPPY, BUT IT’S
HAUNTING, TOO.
IT’S A HAUNTING THING.
>> Reporter: AND INSPIRING, TOO.
FOR KAREN STRNAD, FAMILY HISTORY
COME TO LIFE IN THE MOST
PERSONAL WAY.
>> WHEN I PUT THE DRESS ON, IT
FIT ME PERFECTLY.
THE WHOLE THING IS SURREAL.
THE TORCH HAS BEEN PASSED.
IT WAS PASSED FROM HEDY’S DRESS
DESIGNS THAT SHE CREATED IN
BOHEMIA TO HER HUSBAND TO MY
GREAT GRANDFATHER, WHO STARTED
THIS PROCESS IN TERMS OF
STARTING THE IMMIGRATION
APPLICATION PROCESS IN THE
UNITED STATES."
>> Reporter: AMONG THOSE
ADMIRING THE DRESSES: FAMILY
MEMBERS WHO NEVER KNEW THEIR
MURDERED RELATIVES, DIDN’T KNOW
THEIR STORY, AND NOW DO.
>> WHAT WE SEE HERE IS HISTORY
IS ONGOING.
THIS IS NEVER GOING TO DIE.
AND WE HAVE TO KEEP TELLING THE
STORY SO THAT HISTORY DOES NOT
REPEAT ITSELF.
>> Sreenivasan: VISIT
www.newshour.pbs.org, WHERE YOU
CAN FIND A LINK TO A DOCUMENTARY
PRODUCED ON THE SAME SUBJECT BY
MILWAUKEE PUBLIC TELEVISION.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
"VIEWERS LIKE YOU," SOME OF YOUR
FEEDBACK ABOUT OUR RECENT WORK.
WE HEARD FROM MANY OF YOU ABOUT
OUR REPORT LAST SUNDAY ON
COMPENSATION-- OR THE LACK OF
IT-- FOR PEOPLE LIKE DREW
WHITLEY, WHO SERVED TIME FOR A
CRIME HE DID NOT COMMIT.
IT TURNS OUT THAT WHILE 30
STATES DO OFFER THE WRONGLY
CONVICTED SOME FORM OF
COMPENSATION, ANOTHER 20 STATES
DON’T, INCLUDING PENNSYLVANIA,
WHERE WHITLEY SPENT 18 YEARS IN
PRISON BEFORE BEING EXONERATED
OF THE CRIME.
>> DID PEOPLE ASSUME AS SOON AS
YOU WERE EXONERATED THAT YOU
WOULD BE PAID MONEY?
>> OH, YES.
I DID, TOO.
>> Sreenivasan: ALMOST EVERYONE
WHO WROTE US ON FACEBOOK
EXPRESSED OUTRAGE.
PHYLAND-JUAN BECERRA WROTE:
"IT IS LUDICROUS THAT IN SO MANY
STATES, MINE INCLUDED, THEY ARE
LET OUT AND LEFT TO THEIR OWN
DEVICES WITH ABSOLUTELY NOTHING.
SHAME, SHAME, SHAME."
CAROLE PAPY ADDED: "WE CAN NEVER
GIVE THEM BACK THE LOST, BEST
YEARS OF THEIR LIVES, BUT MONEY
IS BETTER THAN NOTHING AT ALL.
A SLIDING SCALE FOR TIME SERVED
AND HARSHNESS OF THE EXPERIENCE
WOULD BE A START.
AND THOSE 20 STATES THAT OFFER
NOTHING NEED AN OVERHAUL AND A
CONSCIENCE."
SEVERAL PEOPLE SAID AUTHORITIES
SHOULD BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR
THEIR MISTAKES.
FROM JUDITH HARLAN, WHO SAID:
"NOT POSSIBLE TO GIVE BACK WHAT
WAS STOLEN, WHICH IS WHY JUDGES
AND PROSECUTORS NEED TO BE
BROUGHT TO JUSTICE AS THEY KNOW
AND ACCEPT DAILY WRONGS."
AND JAMES LEE LUCIER WENT
FURTHER: "IF HE WAS
INTENTIONALLY WRONGED, THOSE WHO
WRONGED HIM SHOULD SPEND TIME IN
PRISON, AND HE SHOULD BE AWARDED
THEIR ASSETS.
THE AUTHORITIES SHOULD MAKE A
CLEAR AND LOUD PUBLIC APOLOGY."
BUT SEVERAL OF YOU QUESTIONED
WHETHER THERE WAS ANY REAL WAY
TO MAKE AMENDS.
JOSHELLE GREST WROTE: "THERE’S
NO WAY TO REPAY TIME!
THERE’S JUST NOT!"
AND JOSHUA IANO SUMMED IT UP
THIS WAY: "WE OWE THEM A NEW
LIFE."
AS ALWAYS, LET US KNOW WHAT YOU
THINK OF OUR STORIES ON TWITTER,
FACEBOOK OR AT newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
ANOTHER DOCTOR WHO CONTRACTED
EBOLA IN WEST AFRICA WILL BE
TREATED IN THE UNITED STATES.
DR. MARTIN SALIA, A SURGEON FROM
SIERRA LEONE, WHO IS A PERMANENT
U.S. RESIDENT, ARRIVED IN
NEBRASKA THIS AFTERNOON.
HE IS SAID TO BE CRITICALLY ILL.
AND A LEBANESE-CANADIAN
SOCIOLOGY PROFESSOR HAS BEEN
EXTRADITED TO FRANCE AND CHARGED
WITH A 1980 BOMBING OUTSIDE A
PARIS SYNAGOGUE.
FOUR PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
AUTHORITIES LINK HIM TO THE
POPULAR FRONT FOR THE
LIBERATION OF PALESTINE.
HE DENIES THE CHARGES.
JOIN US TOMORROW ON AIR AND
ONLINE.
WE WILL REPORT ON THE
CONTROVERSY IN ONE MASSACHUSETTS
TOWN ABOUT A PLAN TO BAN THE
SALE OF ALL TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.